Document and test remote inputs (#668)
nextstrain/ncov: docs/remote_inputs.md

# Overview of remote nCoV files (intermediate build assets)

We have two repos which routinely upload files to s3 buckets: `ncov-ingest` and `ncov`.
Each of those runs separate pipelines for `gisaid` and `genbank` (aka `open`) data sources, with the intention that the latter are available for public download.
These files are intended to be available for use as starting points for running the `ncov` pipeline.
This page details where different assets come from, and how they may be used as inputs for your own workflow.

> The GISAID data is stored at `s3://nextstrain-ncov-private` and the open (GenBank) data on the public bucket `s3://nextstrain-data/files/ncov/open`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GISAID data is stored at `s3://nextstrain-ncov-private` and is not publicly available, in line with the GISAID Terms of Use (this is used internally by Nextstrain).  The open (GenBank) data is available in the public bucket `s3://nextstrain-data/files/ncov/open`
```

I just think it might be good to be extra-explicitly-clear that this data is not available.

The latter is intentionally made public in the hope that others can use this data as inputs for their workflows (see below).

## All available genomes and metadata
Entire metadata & sequences data is uploaded from the `ncov-ingest` workflows for each of the `gisaid` and `open` sources:

* `metadata.tsv.gz`
* `sequences.fasta.gz`
* `nextclade.tsv.gz`
* `additional_info.tsv.gz` (GISAID only)
* `flagged_metadata.txt.gz` (GISAID only)

The `ncov` repo contains two nextstrain-only workflows which use the above data to generate our analyses visible on nextstrain.org.
A side-effect of this is the creation and upload of processed versions of the entire dataset:

> * `aligned.fasta.xz` alignment via [nextalign](https://github.com/nextstrain/nextclade). The default reference genome is MN908947 (Wuhan-Hu-1).

Reviewer 2: Oh.. Yeah, I am writing [docs](https://github.com/nextstrain/nextclade/tree/master/docs/). Slooowly. I think we might host them on `docs.nextstrain.org` and the links will go there then. But it's not done yet.

Meanwhile, the link you've proposed, https://github.com/nextstrain/nextclade/tree/master/packages/nextalign_cli is okay. 

When the docs are ready, I will remove the "User's guide" section and link out to the final docs from there instead.

Thoughts?

P.S. Any help there is super duper welcome too! :flushed:

> * `aligned.fasta.xz` alignment via [nextalign](https://github.com/nextstrain/nextclade). The default reference genome is MN908947 (Wuhan-Hu-1).

Author: The nextalign link is a much better one 👍

* `mutation-summary.tsv.xz` A summary of the data in `aligned.fasta.xz`.
* `masked.fasta.xz` Masked alignment

> * `filtered.fasta.xz` The masked alignment with sequences excluded due to incomplete / invalid dates, unexpected genome length, missing metadata. We also maintain a [list of sequences to exclude](https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov/blob/master/defaults/exclude.txt).

Reviewer: It might be worth clarifying here if this `filtered` file has the sequences from `exclude` already excluded, or not - for me reading this I feel it's ambiguous!

Author: Done, thanks!

## Subsampled datasets

Our GISAID and GenBank (open) profiles each define 7 builds (a Global build and one build per region: Asia, Africa, Oceania, Europe, North & South America).
Each of these is a different subsample of the entire dataset, and each will result in the following intermediates uploaded:

* `{build_name}/sequences.fasta.xz` 
* `{build_name}/metadata.tsv.xz`
* `{build_name}/aligned.fasta.xz` 
* `{build_name}/{build_name}.json` (the main auspice dataset file)
* `{build_name}/{build_name}_tip-frequencies.json`
* `{build_name}/{build_name}_root-sequence.json`

> In addition to the Auspice JSONs uploaded as sister-files to the intermediates upon which they are based, we upload these JSONs to `s3://nextstrain-data` for auspice to access through nextstrain.org.

## Aside: What triggers the upload of these files?

> > This section is only useful for understanding the internal workings of our pipelines. You are welcome to skip it!

Author: Moved to dev-docs

Typically, everything’s triggered from the  `ncov` pipeline’s `trigger` command.
This will also run the `ncov` pipeline force-requiring the rules `deploy` and `upload`.

> TODO Currently (2021-06-22) this is only for the `nextstrain_profiles/nextstrain` profile.

> The ncov repo contains a GitHub Action `trial-build` which is manually run [via github.com](https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov/actions/workflows/trial-build.yml). This will ask for a “trial name” and upload intermediate files to  `nextstrain-ncov-private/trial/$TRIAL_NAME` and `nextstrain-staging/files/ncov/open/trial/$TRIAL_NAME`. Auspice datasets for visualisation will be available at `https://nextstrain.org/staging/ncov/gisaid/trial/$TRIAL_NAME/$BUILD_NAME` and `https://nextstrain.org/staging/ncov/open/trial/$TRIAL_NAME/$BUILD_NAME`.

Author: The dev-docs is (conceptually) the right place. I've moved it there. I did notice that the dev-docs were a mixture of very basic get-up-and-running documentation and more advanced (releasing new workflow versions etc).

In the simplest form, an input specifies a local path to some metadata and sequences, like so:

```yaml
inputs:
  - name: example-data
    metadata: data/example_metadata.tsv
    sequences: data/example_sequences.fasta
```

Using the above table, we can easily modify this to create a build which uses the global subsample of GenBank data:

```yaml
inputs:
  - name: global-representative-genbank-sample
    metadata: s3://nextstrain-data/files/ncov/open/global/metadata.tsv.gz
    sequences: s3://nextstrain-data/files/ncov/open/global/sequences.fasta.gz
```

To avoid unnecessarily aligning these sequences, we can instead start from the aligned sequences, like so:

```yaml
inputs:
  - name: global-representative-genbank-sample
    metadata: s3://nextstrain-data/files/ncov/open/global/metadata.tsv.gz
    aligned: s3://nextstrain-data/files/ncov/open/global/aligned.fasta.gz
```

The following starting points are available:

* replace `sequences` with `aligned` (skips alignment 😉)
* replace `sequences` with `masked` (skips alignment and masking steps)
* replace `sequences` with `filtered` (skips alignment, masking and basic filtering steps)

> ## Compressed vs uncompressed starting points

Author: This was actually the section that started this whole PR -- In resolving https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov/pull/628#discussion_r653951052, I couldn't work out whether it was possible to start with uncompressed (remote) alignment, which led me to implementing test builds to find out, which led me to realising we couldn't start from a local `aligned` input, which led to this whole docs page :)

I think this table is important, but perhaps there's a more appropriate place than this.

> ## Compressed vs uncompressed starting points

Author: I've updated the table after some more testing. There was a lot in three that I consider "gotchas" and thus I think the table contains valuable information, especially if anyone's hosting their own starting points (I think CZI does this).

|            | local (uncompressed)  | local (.xz) | remote (uncompressed) | remote (.xz) |
| ---        | ---                   | ---         | ---                   | ---          |
| sequences  |  ✅                   |  ✅          |  ❌  <sup>1</sup>     |  ✅          |
| metadata   |  ✅                   |  ✅          |  ✅                   |  ✅  <sup>2</sup> |
| aligned    |  ✅                   |  ✅          |  ❌  <sup>1</sup>     |  ✅          |
| masked     |  ✅                   |  ✅          |  ❌  <sup>1</sup>     |  ✅          |
| filtered   |  ✅                   |  ✅          |  ❌  <sup>1</sup>     |  ✅          |

1. These will be downloaded with a `.xz` suffix which causes errors downstream in the pipeline.

> 2. Decompressed during download.

Author: We currently decompress via the `download_metadata` rule: https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov/blob/master/workflow/snakemake_rules/download.smk#L46-L57

> 2. Decompressed during download.

Author: Similarly, we decompress the downloading of the `aligned`, `masked` and `filtered` assets I think. I'll leave this comment unresolved and do some more checking.

> 2. Decompressed during download.

Author: Table updated so I'm going to resolve this.

> We shouldn't decompress metadata during download anymore.

I agree -  this table can remind us to implement this :wink:
